You are listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, click the link in the show notes or go to FBCWS.org.
Today's message comes from senior pastor, Dr. Bob McCartney.
Hey, good morning.
Really glad you're here today.
Let's open our Bibles to Ecclesiastes chapter 6.
I want to welcome those of you at Shepherd Campus.
as well as those of you at West and our East Sanctuary and those of you who watch us online are on TV.
Thanks for being here this morning.
In 1963 there was a band that was touring America and they had a few days off so they were in a hotel in Clearwater Beach, Florida and the guitarist in the band was just strumming on his guitar kind of
playing around and he started playing the same few chords over and over and over and he just, he really liked the way these chords kind of fit together and in a few minutes the vocalist in the group walked in and he's playing this little tune just over and over and over and he said, I just really liked this.
Maybe we could write some words to go with it and the vocalist sort of starts listening and he plays it through two or three more times and the vocalist kind of starts humming along and
The words just came to him, and he, as the cords began to play, he sang, I can't get no satisfaction.
Now, some of you recognize that.
Do you people even know who the Rolling Stones are?
I mean, he hadn't even discovered America yet when they were popular.
The guitarist was Keith Richard, the vocalist was Mick Jagger, and the song,
though a grammatical train wreck became one of their most iconic songs.
I can't get no satisfaction.
And it became an anthem.
I would say you could sing that song over our culture for the last 60 years.
That is who we are.
We are searching for satisfaction.
And that is what Solomon is going to dig in for us today in this passage of scripture.
We are a generation of satisfaction seekers, whether it's with gadgets or the next experience or the next promotion or the next job, or it is the next new thing that comes along.
We are constantly longing for something to fill us.
The truth is that for those of us in this room who have wrestled,
with a thirst we can't quench, with an emptiness we can't fill, with an itch we can't scratch, Solomon is going to talk to us today.
And I got a feeling that's a lot of folks who are listening today, because it is a picture of who we are.
You see, this is not a modern problem.
It is an ancient problem.
And Solomon, even though he had all of the wealth that you could possibly imagine, and he had women galore, and he had every experience that he could possibly imagine.
Solomon finds himself trying to satisfy the deepest longing of our heart.
So we're to chapter six.
Now, if you've looked ahead, the book has 12 chapters.
So we're pretty much close to the midway point.
And in many ways, what Solomon does in this chapter is something of a summary.
I don't know if he knew he was halfway through what he was writing, like he had kind of planned it out, or if this is just kind of a moment when he says, let me reflect on all the things that I've talked about.
So there's a little bit of repetition here.
If you hear some things, you go, he kind of said that earlier.
Well, yes, he did, because there's something of a, this is something of a summary.
to kind of say, okay, here's where we are now.
But chapter six is also a return to a theme.
Last week we talked a lot about money and how that won't satisfy our souls.
And in this passage, he kind of returns to this phrase that we've talked about a little bit.
It's a phrase that's used 29 times in the book.
And so it's really important.
It's that little phrase under the sun.
Let me remind you what that phrase under the sun means.
It means living on a horizontal plane.
It means living for the things of this earth.
It means living trying to find meaning and provision and joy and security in the stuff of earth.
It is the horizontal relationship, not your vertical relationship with God.
And what Solomon is saying is, here is how frustrating.
Here is how empty life under the sun really is.
If you live for possessions, for position,
for pleasure or for performance.
What you are going to experience is what he experiences in this chapter.
So let's move into it and talk a little bit about it.
First of all, Solomon's gonna tell us that the search for satisfaction is frustrating.
It's frustrating.
Look at chapter six, verse one.
Here is a tragedy I have observed under the sun.
Now that phrase again, it's super important.
and it weighs heavily on humanity.
He says, this is just, I'm gonna lay out a tragedy for you.
Now, before I move into the next part of this, I need to tell you something that will give you insight as we read through it into what Solomon is trying to say to us, what he's really attempting to communicate.
In the ancient world, in the ancient Near East, in the Middle East, there were three markers
of success and blessing.
If you had these three things, you were considered to be successful or blessed by God.
The first is wealth.
In the ancient world, if you were wealthy, you were blessed.
And now that's not, we know that that's not the sum total of blessing, but that was a marker in the ancient world.
That's what people looked at.
The second thing was if you had a lot of children, you were blessed.
And the third thing was if you lived a long life,
Those were the three markers of blessing of having a blessed life in the ancient world.
But Solomon says, here's a tragedy.
And here's the tragedy.
Look at verse two.
God gives a person riches, wealth, and honor so that he lacks nothing of all he desires for himself.
But God does not allow him to enjoy them.
Instead, a stranger will enjoy them.
This is futile and a sickening tragedy.
A man may father a hundred children and live many years.
No matter how long he lives, if he is not satisfied by good things and does not even have a proper burial, I say that a stillborn child is better off than he.
For he comes in futility and he goes in darkness and his name is shrouded in darkness, though a stillborn child does not see the sun, is not conscious, it has more rest than he.
And if a person lives a thousand years twice, but does not experience happiness, do not both go to the same place.
All of a person's labor is for his stomach, yet the appetite is never satisfied.
Now Solomon gives us those three markers and he says, what if, what if you had all three
but you still weren't satisfied.
What if you had all three of those things?
He says, what if a guy has wealth?
He has riches and wealth and honor and he lacks absolutely nothing.
This guy has the Midas touch.
Everything he touches turns to gold.
He is prosperous.
He is wealthy beyond measure, but he doesn't enjoy.
He's not permitted to enjoy what God has given him.
We talked last week about money.
And at the end of that chapter, I need to remind you of kind of where we came to, that Solomon sort of came down on the side of, it's a gift from God.
Just enjoy it.
It's the theology of God's material blessings as a gift from him and just live with gratitude and thanksgiving.
So enjoy it.
But Solomon says, what if you've got all that money and you can enjoy it?
You know, there are stories from history where that is absolutely true.
There was a guy named Jay Paul Getty, and Jay Paul Getty was one of the wealthiest men in the world in the middle of the last century, 1940s, 50s, and 60s.
In 1966, the Guinness Book of World Records called him the wealthiest private citizen in the world.
At that time, 60 years ago, he was worth 1.2
billion dollars.
Made us fortunate in the oil business in Bartlesville, Oklahoma, and then expanded all over the world with a global petroleum empire.
But he was notoriously stingy.
He was a man who was an absolute tight wad.
So much so that he had a country home where people would come.
His family would come and his family would bring friends.
And back in those days, and some of you remember this, some of you cannot conceive of this.
We only had landlines for phones, and you couldn't do anything but talk on them.
That's it.
Couldn't text anybody, no apps, nothing like that.
And if you called anybody outside your county, it was a long distance phone call, and it cost money.
So you made that phone call really fast.
Well, John Paul Getty got tired of people
making long-distance phone calls, his family and their friends come into his country home and make long-distance phone calls, and he installed a pay phone.
This is a guy worth $1.2 billion, he installs a pay phone.
In 1973, his grandson, Jay Paul Getty III, was kidnapped by the Italian mafia.
They wanted $1.5 million as a ransom.
He refused to pay it.
For his grandson,
until they cut off the boy's ear and send it to him, send it to him in a box.
And he said, you'll get, then said you'll get more parts if you don't pay us.
He still didn't want to pay it, but Getty's son, the boy's father, came to him and said, look dad, this is my son we're talking about.
We're going to pay the ransom and get him back.
And so J. Paul Getty loaned his son the $1.5 million ransom at 4% interest.
This is a picture of a man who has wealth and has riches and he cannot enjoy it.
Let me tell you something.
When you look at people like that, don't envy them.
What looks like success and blessing and prosperity and pleasure to you might be misery to them.
The Bible says in Proverbs 23 verse 17, don't let your heart envy sinners instead always fear the Lord.
Don't envy those kind of people.
And here's what Solomon's saying to us.
He says, what if you have this sign of blessing?
You have wealth.
The world would say, he's blessed of God, but you can't even enjoy it.
Is it really a blessing?
And then he says, what about children?
What if a man has a hundred children?
Now, in the angel world, a hundred children, I mean, you would be seen as absolutely uniquely blessed.
This is why when you read the stories in the Bible of
people like Abraham and Sarah and they're old and they don't have a child.
Well, this is really something that weighed heavily on them in their society and in their culture.
To not have a child was to be seen as not to be blessed by God.
As a matter of fact, the whispers would be you were cursed.
That's exactly what it would look like and what the people would say of you.
And so having children is this sign of blessing.
But what if you have a hundred children?
He says, and yet you're not really much better off.
And now, now let me say this before I go here.
Solomon goes to a dark, dark place in this passage.
I mean, he says to us in this passage, is he really better off than a stillborn child?
Let me help you with this.
Solomon is using a writing technique, a literary technique that was very common in the intro world, and we still use it today, but we just call it hyperbole.
Hyperbole is exaggeration for the sake of emphasis to get your attention.
And what he's doing is he's using the most extreme example that he could possibly think of.
And he says, well, it's stillborn child's better off than that guy.
Well, why?
Well, the stillborn child never knew suffering, never knew sin, never knew pain, and went straight into the arms of God.
We believe that, by the way.
Let me talk to you for a minute.
I'm reading this passage this week, and I'm struggling.
I'm going to tell you something.
I've never been more tempted to skip verses in all my life as I was these verses.
I just don't want to talk about it.
But God really dealt with me this week and prompted me.
In the Bible, we have
biblical reason, not just Bob's opinion.
We have biblical reason to believe that when a child dies, that child goes straight into the arms of God.
David and Bathsheba had a child and that child died as an infant.
And David said, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, I might add,
He will not return to me, but I will go to Him."
I want you to know something.
I know when I talk to this many people, somebody, somebody at one of our campuses or here lost a child, and I'm sorry, but I want you to know something that God loves you and God loves your child.
And here's what I need you to do.
When you miss that child, when you weep over what might have been, which is awful, I want you to entrust that child to the only one who could possibly love them more than you.
There's only one.
God loves that baby.
And I want you to know that God loves them.
And God loves you.
But Solomon says, what if you had a hundred children?
But you still didn't feel blessed.
Now here's what's interesting.
In the Bible, children are a sign of blessing.
The Bible says in Psalm 127 verse three, children are a gift of the Lord.
The fruit of the womb is a reward.
Children are a blessing according to the Bible.
In our culture, children are a burden.
That's what many people are deciding.
Many people are deciding that rather than having children, what we want is freedom.
Rather than having children, what we want is extra money.
Rather than having children, we want to be able to travel and we want to be able to do all these, all these sort of worldly, under the sun things.
And all the while, what we've decided is that,
that we'd rather have a career, we'd rather have cats and have children.
That's what some people have decided.
Now there are people who cannot have children, and I'm gonna tell you something, I've walked this road, my wife and I've walked this road for a while, for about 17 years of our marriage, and we understand, and I pray for you.
But if you've made the choice not to have children, because you wanna pursue other things, I wanna say something.
And you need to hear this.
That feels fine in your 20s.
And in your 30s, it's all right.
But in your 40s, it starts bothering you and by your 50s, it's awfully lonely with just your cats and not any children.
In the Western civilization, there's something of a population collapse that's going on right now that nobody sees.
New York Times did an article on this not long ago.
The birth rate in the Western world, in the United States of America,
has fallen 25% since 2007.
And most of that is by choice.
People say we're going to pursue other things.
Let me explain something to you.
A 1.6% birth rate per couple, a 1.6 birth rate won't even replenish the population.
I mean, it takes two.
Figure that out, okay?
I mean, the math is real simple, but we're at 1.6.
Japan is less than one, less than one.
The population is collapsing in Western civilization.
Now, I'm not telling you that there is a biblical mandate somehow that you have to have 100 kids.
That's not what Solomon is saying.
But what he is saying is, you need to view children differently.
Children are a blessing.
They are not a burden.
Now, I'm going to caveat that with one thing.
Those first six months pretty tough.
That sleep deprivation is a rough deal, but it's worth it, folks.
It's worth it.
All right.
So what if you have wealth?
What if you have a hundred children?
Then he says this, what if you live twice as long as the longest living man who ever lived on planet earth?
He says to us, what if you live a thousand years twice?
I don't know why he just didn't say 2000 years, but he says a thousand years twice.
The man who lived the longest of any person who has ever lived on planet earth is a man named Methuselah.
Methuselah lived before the flood, which changed everything.
People before the flood lived a lot longer.
The environment changed.
A lot of people think that our genetics were
better back earlier that there were genetic anomalies that have taken place that caused disease and those sort of things now that didn't happen back then.
The gene code was much more pure and accurate, but Methuselah lived 969 years.
He died, if you do the math, he died the year the flood happened.
He didn't die in the flood.
He died the year the flood happened.
Noah's flood, the flood that flooded the entire earth, Noah and the ark.
That's the story I'm talking about.
But Methuselah lived 969 years.
Solomon says, what if you lived twice as long as that plus some?
What if you live twice as long as the longest man who ever lived and yet you're still not fulfilled and happy and satisfied?
You see, what Solomon has done, I see it systematically said,
what his society said brought blessing.
Wealth and children and longevity really didn't do it.
And then there's this verse that he comes to at verse seven.
He says, all a person's labor is for his stomach, yet the appetite is never satisfied.
I do not often challenge
Bible translators.
First of all, Bibles are translated by a team of experts.
Okay?
And I'm one guy.
They're experts.
They know more about the biblical languages than I know.
They know more about Hebrew than I know.
But there's something in this verse I want to show you.
Solomon says, all of a person's labor is forced on, but yet the appetite, look at that word, appetite is never satisfied.
In the Hebrew text, that is the word nephish.
The word nephish is more commonly translated and virtually all of the places in the Old Testament, soul.
I think what Solomon was saying was this, all the person's labor is for his stomach, yes.
In other words, we just take it all in and yet our soul is never satisfied.
You can have all the wealth in the world.
You can have all the children you could possibly feed.
You could live for 2,000 years and yet your soul wouldn't be satisfied.
All of that stuff would just be an illusion without a reality.
All of that would be impressive, but it would be empty.
Empty.
There's something else that we're missing.
You know,
I read an article not too long ago and there was this photograph that came with it.
So I want to show you this photograph.
This is a guy named Jonathan Carley and he is wearing the uniform of a rear admiral, that's one star, in the British Navy.
And you see those 12 medals, service medals across his chest and the little flower
is because it was Remembrance Day.
The poppy flower is what the British wear on Remembrance Day.
Now Remembrance Day in Britain is kind of a combination of Veterans Day and Memorial Day.
And so they have these ceremonies, and Jonathan Carley, Rear Admiral's uniform shows up, they give him a wreath to lay on Remembrance Day at this ceremony, and he lays it, and everybody's impressed with him.
And then the story came out,
after he identified himself to the media and they started researching him, that Jonathan Carley is not only not a rear admiral.
Jonathan Carley has never served in anybody's Army, Navy, Air Force or Marines anywhere.
Nothing.
He bought the uniform and the metals on Amazon.
Yeah.
When the police showed up because it's a crime to impersonate a serviceman in Great Britain,
The police show up to arrest him.
He said to them, I've been expecting you.
The media interviewed his neighbors and he was telling them that he didn't tell them he was a rear admiral.
What he told them was that he worked for the British Secret Service.
He was a spy.
Let me give you a little help for him.
If anybody ever tells you they're a spy, they're probably not.
This guy's probably got a mental illness or he's just a compulsive liar.
But what he wants is to impress, but there's nothing behind the impression.
There is emptiness there.
There's nothing.
And that's what Solomon is trying to get at.
And this becomes so frustrating for us as we listen, as we read through this, and we're like Solomon, this is just dark and empty stuff.
And he knows that.
So then he gives us the satisfaction solution.
So what's the answer to this?
If money and children in long life don't help us out, look at verse nine.
Better what the eyes see than wandering desire.
What your eyes see is reality.
What your eyes see is the house you actually live in.
Better the house you live in than daydreaming about a mansion.
Wandering desire.
Better the wife you have than lustfully daydreaming about one, someone else.
And by the way, let me reverse that.
Better the husband you have than lustfully daydreaming about somebody else.
Better the job you have than constantly striving to get a little more.
It's not wrong to better yourself, but if that is the consuming desire of your soul, if that's what your heart always goes to, it says something about who you are.
Solomon is saying in verse nine, with that expression, better what the eyes see than wandering desire, be satisfied,
with what you have.
Stop chasing illusions.
Our culture, and especially with the advent of like social media and those things, there are more illusions sometimes it appears to me than reality.
Like I've said this before, but like reels, you know, they're entertaining and there's some cute stuff on there,
There's stuff on there that just feeds your wandering desire.
Like it just pulls you off after to chase something that's not reality.
And it pulls you off to chase something that doesn't matter.
And it pulls you away to chase something that will not satisfy your soul.
So Solomon says, be content with what you have.
There are two, two New Testament admonishments that I think fit here.
How do you do that?
How do I be content with what I have?
How do I be content with what my eyes see?
Number one, be thankful.
Be thankful.
1 Thessalonians 5, 18 says, and everything give thanks, but this is God's will for you in Christ Jesus.
I have people typically, it's college and high school students come to me all the time and say, I need to know God's will.
Let me tell you what God's will is.
And everything give thanks.
For this is God's will for you in Christ Jesus.
That's God's will for your life.
That's it.
That's not the sum total of it.
That's part of it.
Give thanks.
You go, Bob, you don't understand.
Man, I am in this season right now and it's hard and it hurts.
And I'm confused in everything.
Give thanks.
Because what I believe more than just about anything else in this life, the truth that I hang on to more than anything else is that this and I know
that God causes all things to work together for good to those who love him and are called according to his purpose.
And I don't know how he does it sometimes, and I sure don't know why he does it sometimes, but I am gonna tell you that he takes the good, the bad, and the ugly, and he works them all together.
He causes them to work together for my good and his glory.
And someday, even the stuff I don't understand, he's gonna let me figure it out.
And if it's not in this life,
Maybe it'll be when I stand before him.
In everything, give things.
I know your marriage is hard right now.
For this is God's will for you in Christ Jesus.
Better what your eyes see than wandering desire.
Second, be content.
Be content.
Philippians chapter four, verse 11.
Paul writes, I have learned to be content in whatever circumstances I find myself.
I know how to make do with a little.
I know how to make do with a lot.
In any and all circumstances, I've learned the secret of being content, whether well fed or hungry, whether in abundance or need.
And here's the secret.
I am able to do all things through him who strengthens me.
That verse of scripture was not given to us to put on a big banner so the football team could run through it on Friday night.
That verse was given to us for difficult moments.
for hard times, for confusing moments in our life when we say, I don't understand what God's doing.
I don't know why God's doing it, but I can do all things through Him who strengthens me.
I can do that.
See, Solomon is trying to help us understand that the constant chasing the wind, that's one of those phrases that he uses too.
Grasping for more, grasping for something else, grasping for someone else.
He says to us, it's just chasing the wind.
You'll never catch it.
And if you do, you'll reap a whirlwind.
That's what happens.
We have this idea that somehow it's, we're going to find perfection.
You know, my marriage doesn't, it's not so good, but I could find a perfect one.
Yeah.
Unfortunately, you'll be in it.
We have this, I call it the vacation illusion.
It's my best illustration of it.
This time of year, I start thinking about where we're going to go on vacation, you know?
Start making plans and planning out a route if we're going to do a road trip, making hotel reservations.
And we're going to go to this beautiful place and it's going to be perfect.
And day one is great.
And day two is great.
But by day three, we're arguing over where to eat.
And by day four or five, we all said the same thing.
Everybody says the same thing.
I just want to go home.
Everybody says, it's the illusion of perfection.
It's the illusion that this is going to satisfy me.
And then Solomon comes down to it and I'm going to wrap this up and I know I do.
But look at verse, skip down to verse 12.
for who knows what is good for anyone in life in the few days of his feudal life that he spends like a shadow.
Who can tell anyone what will happen after him under the sun?
You go, Bob, that doesn't sound hopeful.
Let me explain something.
You read that, you heard that, like a 2026 American.
Who knows?
And we say that rhetorically, and what we mean is nobody knows.
That's not what Solomon means.
Solomon's asking you a question that you can answer.
He's asking you a question that you know the answer to.
Listen to it again.
Who knows what is good for anyone in life?
Who knows what is best for you in life?
Who can tell anyone what will happen to him after?
Who?
God.
That's exactly who it is.
Solomon is saying to us, the source of your real satisfaction is a relationship with God.
And we know now more than Solomon did.
Yes, he's the wisest man that ever lived, but you know more than he did.
Because we know that that relationship only comes through a relationship with the Son of God who is Jesus Christ.
That's where it comes from.
Jesus is going through an area that most Jews would have avoided, an area called Samaria.
And Samaria, there was this racial tension between Samaritans and Jews.
They really hated one another.
So Jesus is there and he comes to this well, an ancient well, and he's sitting there and this woman walks up, she's a Samaritan, he's a Jew, and he asks her to give him a drink.
He didn't have anything to draw water up from the well.
And she says, how is it that you, a Jew asking me, a Samaritan woman for a drink of water?
And Jesus said, if you'd known who asked you, you'd give me a drink and I'd give you a drink.
And she says, well, Lord, just give me this water.
And he responded with these words, everyone who drinks of this water will get thirsty again.
but whoever drinks from the water that I will give him will never get thirsty again.
In fact, the water I will give him will become a well of water, springing up into him for eternal life.
Jesus is saying, the water of this world will never satisfy your soul, but I have water that will fill the emptiness of your heart, and it is a water that will grant you eternal life.
It's living water.
That's what Jesus says.
You need to understand that the stuff of this world is never gonna satisfy you and your wandering desire.
I love that expression that Solomon used.
This constant chasing, something new, something else, something more.
It will not fill you.
Only Jesus will.
You've been listening to a message from First Baptist Church, which is not false.
For more information about First Baptist, including gathering times and locations, click the link in the show notes or go to FBCWF.org.
We'll see you next week.